(heavy metal riff)
Alright, so in this video we are going to talk
about Flexbox versus Grid and when
do you use one or the other?
Are they replacements, do they go together,
can you use them together?
And sort of my idea here is, I'm just kinda give ya
a few points about using one or the other
and then we're gonna go through
I think about nine or ten examples of different UI
patterns that you might want to do.
And I'm gonna show you how I would implement them
either in Grid or in Flexbox where it's
the case that only Flexbox can only do a specific thing.
So as in general Flexbox, sorry in general Grid
can do everything that Flexbox can do,
some people are of the mindset that Flexbox
is for one-dimensional where you lay things out
on a X or a Y axis and CSS Grid is for a multidimensional
when you lay things out on a X and a Y grid.
But that, I don't think that really holds any water
because CSS Grid is also really good at aligning
things on a X or a Y axis.
So um people, you might prefer Flexbox because
you already know it or currently browser support
for Flexbox is much better than Grid,
although that will soon be a thing of the past.
The syntax, some people might like the syntax.
It can get a little bit hairy with the repeat
and the minmax but I think once you've done
six or seven examples with that it starts to set in.
One big benefit for Flexbox over Grid is that
they can be transitioned, meaning that if you want
to animate a Flex grow value and you wanted something
to get bigger, in my JavaScript 30 course,
we made a image gallery with this and it's got a
really nice animation to it.
You can't currently transition anything except
for Grid gap on Firefox in CSS Grid.
So that's a huge benefit for Flexbox.
Pros for Grid is, it's much more consistent
across all the browsers and there's not
as many bugs as Flexbox has.
You really only need to learn one thing.
So if you're trying to be consistent
on your team that's good.
And then also if you're designing something
on a single axis and then you decide you want
to wrap that into multiple rows.
It's very easy to sort of just add more rows with CSS Grid.
Sp let's just go through a whole bunch
of different examples that we have.
Some things that you used to be able to do in Flexbox,
I'm gonna show you how to do in Grid.
And some things that you can do in Flexbox
that are just not possible at all in Grid.
So let's start the first one, which is axis flipping.
And that is with Flexbox, you have the ability
to flip the flex direction from column to row.
So column to row, column to row, column to row.
So let's open up axis-flipping-start
and let's take a look at what we got here.
It's got a button that when you click it,
it runs this function and then it simply just toggles
a class of flipper on this div with a class of flipper.
So let's open up start...
Good, then we will grab our flipper
and say display: grid.
We'll add some grid-gap 20px and then we'll say
grid-template-columns, repeat, auto-fit,
minmax, 50px...
and 1fr...
you gotta be able to spell display right.
There we go, okay so that's on and then when I flip it
what I wanna do, see how it's adding
and removing this class of flip?
I'm going to say when the flipper has also a class of flip.
How do you switch it from column to row?
Well you can just make it one column.
So grid-template-columns, 1fr.
That should do it.
Now I click on it and it's gonna flip it
from one to another.
The one thing you cannot do is, Flexbox has the ability
to do row reverse and column reverse
which would take the items and flip them
in the opposite direction.
You can do that with the order property
but that would be really tedious,
assigning a order property to each one.
But in this case you can flip it over.
And what's neat about that is you can also,
if you wanted to, you could just add another column
and then when you flip it you can flip it from columns
to I guess rows of two columns, so pretty neat there.
So that's the first one.
Let's move on to the second one,
which is controls on the right.
And that looks like something like this.
Where maybe you have some media and you've got some
buttons on the right here and then whatever is left
is going to be for the title of the actual song.
So let's look at how we can code that up in grid.
Controls on the right start.
Here we go.
So I'm instead of assuming that there's
going to be three buttons because I don't want to
have to do that with Flexbox, you could just apply
a flex one to this and then it would fit it up.
What we're going to do is we're just going
to make a one column grid.
So grid-template-columns, 1fr.
And we're also, I guess we also have to display: grid on it.
Good, now we've got a bit of a problem here
because our additional items are now being added as rows
instead of to the right here.
So what we can do is, we can change that
with our grid-auto-flow, so grid-auto-flow.
We'll change that to column and then they will
just line up nicely on the end.
So if I were to turn this on, each of these tracks,
you'll see that our actual column is number one here
and then any additional items that get thrown our way,
they are not added as new rows,
they are added as new columns.
So if they are, if we are to increase the amount of buttons
on one of these items right here, you'll see
that they just nicely stack up to the right
and then the additional room is used up
for the title of the song.
And that's great because if I were to then resize
the width of something like this,
then you can see that, well obviously at a certain point
it gets brutal but you, the tech starts to wrap
on to new lines as it starts to run out of space.
Let's move on to the next one which is: flex-on-item.
So here is something that I do quite often
and it's making media controls for a video player.
Where you have a video player and this might be
like a scrubber bar that shows you far along you are.
And then you have buttons for pausing and playing,
for speeding up or slowing it down.
For turning captions on and for downloading the video.
So, well the way I like to do this is just
to have the buttons take up as much space as they need
and then whatever we have left, in this case a scrubber
will just take up that much value.
So if there's a lot of room, the scrubber
will be really wide and if there's not a lot of room,
the scrubber will be a little bit more shallow.
So let's open up that flex on item start.
And this is a case where I prefer Flexbox
for this and I'll show you why.
So if I were to, well I gotta open up
the starter files for this.
Take our controls, so we have these controls
and we have all of our items in there.
So I will say display: flex...
and immediately that's going to make the container here
a flex container and then each item inside of it
will be a flex item and I have put
a min-width of a 100px on that scrubber.
But what I want, is I want the scrubber
to take up the rest of the room.
So I can just go to the scrubber and say just flex: 1
and that will flex grow because there's extra space.
It will grow to take up the rest of the space
and then I can also say.
I think it is align-items: center.
There that will vertically center it,
you see it's perfectly centered.
Now that's great, if I were to do that in Grid,
how would I do it?
Let me comment that out, comment that out.
I would have to do display: grid
and then grid-template-columns:
auto auto auto 1fr...
auto auto and that will give me the same layout
because I want these, all these buttons to take up
the same amount then the actual scrubber and then auto auto
and that's, that's a little bit brittle because
what if I were to delete one of the buttons?
Now all of a sudden the thing that is, getting bigger
is one of the buttons not the actual value.
So you can see the value in being able
to apply the flex directly to the element
and that way if the order or the number of items
in your flex container changes you aren't screwed
like I am in this case.
So Flexbox for the win on that one.
Let's move on to the next one which is perfectly centered
and this is something that you do a lot.
You have like a height of hero or something
and then you have any number of items
and you want to perfectly center those in the middle.
So we'll open perfectly-centered-start
and if I, let's try, let's try
to perfectly center it in Flexbox first.
So we'll say display: flex and now, okay now it's turned it
into rows so we have to change the flex direction.
So flex-direction: column, there we go.
And then I would say justify-content: center, I believe
and align-items: center.
Bam, perfect that's exactly what I want.
I did that in Flexbox in four values there.
Now let's see how do I do it in Grid?
So we will display: grid on that
and then we will justify-content: center, that will bring it
into the center and align-items: center.
There we go, that's actually not what I want.
I goofed it up, I think it is justify-items.
Center yeah, and then align-items.
So this will still fill up the entire grid, right.
So the grid is obviously 200 pixels high
and if I made that 400 pixels high, that it would be
even bigger but what I want is them
to be perfectly centered in here.
I don't want them to be this big.
So I think that is align-content
because we want to pop it in the middle, there we go.
And you can see that the rows themselves
are not stretching now they are just being as big
as the content needs to be.
So I don't know.
That works perfectly in both of them,
I wouldn't sweat the extra line of Flexbox.
You can make your decision on which one is better
for you in that case.
Self-control, this one is pretty neat.
This is one that is only doable in Grid.
So if you want to align something in all four corners,
when would you ever do this, I don't know.
But let me, I'm just gonna show you the benefit
of having the justify self and the align self values.
So open up self-control-start and we'll grab this corners.
I've got display: grid already on there
and we're going to make a four by, er two by two grid.
So grid-template-columns: 1fr...
1fr and then I can also do grid-template-rows: 1fr 1fr.
Similarly you can also just do grid-template
as a shorthand and what that will allow us to do is
we can just put a forward slash 1fr 1fr in there
and that's the exact same thing.
You can open it up in your dev tools
and inspect it and you see that grid-template
is just shorthand for grid-template-areas,
grid-template-rows and grid-template-columns.
Good now I wanna put them in the top-right hand-corner,
by default they are stretching so we'll go on to here
and we'll align-items: end.
That will put them at the bottom
and then I also want to justify-items: end.
There so that puts them in
the bottom-right hand-corner of each of them.
Now I wanna override it for the first one
and the second one.
I wanna stick them to the top and then for the first one
and the third one I wanna stick them to the left.
So I've got these selectors here.
So we can use align-self: start
and that will put them at the top,
so we have that in Flexbox,
but what we don't have is a justify-self.
The ability to do it on the other axis
and we want to do that as start.
So that will have full control over, overriding anything
that we've set on the container, we can override
them on each of the individual items.
Good, good, good, what else have we got here?
Self control stacked layout.
Okay so this is another one that is only doable in Flexbox.
So one of the, I guess, downsides or one of the just ways
that Grid works is that you're columns are rigid.
Meaning that you can't have rows that are different sizes
and if you wanted to attain something like this,
you would have to do manual spanning
across all of the different items.
So have a look at stack layout start.
So we'll go on to our stacked and say display: flex
and that will put them all on one line
but I've set them to be 30% width,
so they should be able to wrap.
So we'll say flex-wrap: wrap and that
will put them each on their own line.
Now if I want to make them like we had,
we just say justify-content: space-between.
Or space-around and that will stack them
exactly how we want with the space in the middle.
One downside we have with Flexbox,
if I were to take that off is that there
is no concept of flex gap or just gap at all.
And we, I hopefully we will be getting that
in Flexbox because using margin on flex items
is not ideal because it leads to unintended margin
on the right and the left and then
you have to get into negative margins to take that off.
So it's not great, but that is one for Flexbox,
can only do that.
Unknown content size, so if we have something like this
where you don't know how wide it is and you want to put it
in the middle, how do we do that with Grid?
Well we'll go to unknown content size, start.
Display: grid.
We do know how many columns we have in this case.
So we can say grid-template-columns.
We can just repeat for five
and we can make the size of them auto.
And that will just auto-size them based on the, it's kinda,
you see the image loaded there and it reflowed itself?
And then if we wanted to center it,
we just have to simply justify-content: center
and everything is centered.
We'll put some grid-gap: 20px on that.
And we're in good shape.
So if you ever do know the amount of columns
that you have but do not know how much content
will be inside of each one, then that is
a nice little use case for that.
Unknown number of items.
So this is one where you just want them
to take up as much room as you want
but you don't know how many columns there are going to be.
So I made this little example where we can
keep adding items and then once you hit that minmax value
they'll just start to wrap.
So let's open up unknown number of items, start.
In here we'll say display: grid, grid-template-columns.
We're going to repeat, auto-fit and then we're
gonna use our mixmax that we learned about earlier
to be at a minimum 50 pixels and at a minimum 1fr.
And we'll put some grid gap 20px inside of it, good.
Now as I add more items, they will automatically reflow
and this auto-fit algorithm is going to fit
as many as it can but once they are 50 pixels
and they cannot fit anymore they will then start to wrap.
So that's one that I really, really like.
Using, I use Flexbox for that a lot,
just to fit all on to one line.
The problem with that is as soon as you started to wrap
with Flexbox, you got some weird margin
and everything didn't line up perfectly.
So in this case I really like Grid for that.
I think we've got a couple more here,
unknown number of items.
One more variable widths on each row.
So if you have something like this, where this one
is really, really long and then these ones aren't,
this is not something that a grid can do
because you notice that the items
are not perfectly lining up.
Unless you were to manually span each of them,
which you cannot, Flexbox is a better use case for this.
So let's open up the variable widths each row.
Display: flex, good.
Flex-wrap: wrap, good.
And then you see that like if I put a border on here...
the flex container only goes this far.
So we can go to each of them and put
a flex value of one on it and then it's just going
to fit it in as perfectly as we want.
And here's a good example of the margin error
that I was talking about.
Often what you want is, you want your items
to butt up on the left and the right.
You don't want that.
So if you were to take the margin off,
they butt up perfectly, but you put it on, then they go off.
So you maybe do like margin-right: 10px
and then it takes it off here
because you don't know what the, you don't know
that snickers is the last one in the actual row
and as it gets bigger it's going to reflow that.
So what people have done is, they would do something
like this and then they would take the actual container
and let's say margin-right: -10px or something like that
to bump it up over to the right 10 pixels.
And that will hopefully line it up with your
whatever is, whatever content is above it.
So hopefully we're gonna get flex gap or just gap in general
in CSS and that would fix a lot of those issues.
So I, hopefully those were some good examples.
Hopefully you learned a few things here or there
about when to use Flexbox or Grid.
I would definitely, whenever you encounter something
that you can use Grid or Flexbox for, try to lay it out
in both ways and see which one
works better for your use case.
You are always going to be use Flexbox and Grid.
I think you might, my own opinion, you might
be using Grid a little bit more than Flexbox
once the browser support gets there.
But don't take just my word for it, don't say things like
single access and double access or whatever.
Actually try it yourself and come to your own conclusions
and write a blog post and become a thought leader
or something like that. (laughs)
I'll see you in the next one.
(heavy metal riff)